

===== PAGE 1 =====

arXiv:1606.06066v2  [cs.DB]  16 May 2017
Mining Local Process Models
Niek Taxa,b, Natalia Sidorova a, Reinder Haakma b, Wil M. P. van der Aalst a
aEindhoven University of Technology, P.O. Box 513, Eindhove n, The Netherlands
bPhilips Research, Prof. Holstlaan 4, 5665 AA Eindhoven, The Netherlands
Abstract
In this paper we describe a method to discover frequent behaviora l patterns in
event logs. We express these patterns as local process models . Local process
model mining can be positioned in-between process discovery and ep isode /
sequential pattern mining. The technique presented in this paper is able to
learn behavioral patterns involving sequential composition, concu rrency, choice
and loop, like in process mining. However, we do not look at start-to- end models,
which distinguishes our approach from process discovery and crea tes a link to
episode / sequential pattern mining. We propose an incremental pr ocedure for
building local process models capturing frequent patterns based o n so-called
process trees. We propose ﬁve quality dimensions and correspond ing metrics
for local process models, given an event log. We show monotonicity p roperties
for some quality dimensions, enabling a speedup of local process mod el discovery
through pruning. We demonstrate through a real life case study t hat mining
local patterns allows us to get insights in processes where regular s tart-to-end
process discovery techniques are only able to learn unstructured , ﬂower-like,
models.
Keywords: Process mining, Knowledge discovery, Data mining
1. Introduction
Process mining aims to extract novel insight from event data [1]. Pr ocess
discovery, the task of discovering a process model that is repres entative for the
set of event sequences in terms of start-to-end behavior, i.e. fr om the start
of a case till its termination, plays a prominent role in process mining. M any
process discovery algorithms have been proposed and applied to a v ariety of real
life cases (see [1] for an overview). A diﬀerent perspective on mining patterns in
event sequences can be found in the data mining ﬁeld, where the epis ode mining
[2] and sequential pattern mining [3] subﬁelds focus on ﬁnding freq uent patterns
that are local, not necessarily describing the whole event sequence s from start
to end. Episode mining and sequential pattern mining have e.g. been u sed to
analyze telecommunication networks [2], web navigational logs [2, 4], a nd retail
sales transactions [5].
Preprint submitted to Journal of Innovation in Digital Ecos ystems May 17, 2017


===== PAGE 2 =====

Event sequences
⟨A,A,C,B,A,A,C,B,B,C⟩
⟨C,A,C,B,A,A,A,B,C,B⟩
⟨A,A,B,D,C,D,A,B,C,B⟩
⟨C,A,C,B,B,B,A,D,B,C⟩
⟨B,A,B,C,C⟩
⟨D,A,C,B,C,A,A,C,A,B⟩
⟨D,A,B,C,D,C,A,C,A,B,C⟩
(a)
A 13/21
B 13/20
C 13/19
(b)
B
A
C
D
(c)
Sequential
patterns
⟨A, B, A ⟩
⟨A, B, C ⟩
⟨A, C, A ⟩
⟨A, C, B ⟩
⟨B, A, B ⟩
⟨B, A, C ⟩
⟨C, A, C ⟩
(d)
Figure 1: (a) A log L of sales oﬃcer event sequences with highlighted instances o f the frequent
pattern. (b) The local process model showing frequent behavior in L. (c) The Petri net dis-
covered on L with the Inductive Miner algorithm [12]. (d) The sequential patterns discovered
on L with the PreﬁxSpan algorithm [13].
Sequential pattern mining and episode mining are limited to the discove ry
of sequential orderings or partially ordered sets of events, while process discov-
ery methods aim to discover a larger set of event relations, including sequential
orderings, (exclusive) choice relations, concurrency, and loops, represented in
process models such as Petri nets [6], BPMN [7], and process trees [8]. Pro-
cess models that can be discovered with process discovery method s distinguish
themselves from more traditional sequence mining methods like Hidde n Markov
Models [9] and Recurrent Neural Networks [10, 11] in that proces s models can
be visually represented and their visual representation can be use d for commu-
nication between process stakeholders. However, process disco very is normally
limited to the discovery of a model capturing the behavior of proces s instances
as a whole, and not local patterns within instances. Our goal is to de velop
methods allowing to mine local process models positioned in-between simple
patterns (e.g. subsequences) and start-to-end models. Local process models
focus on a subset of the process activities and describe some beha vioral pattern
that occurs frequently within event sequences. Such local proce ss models cannot
be discovered by using standard techniques.
Imagine a sales department where multiple sales oﬃcers perform fou r types
of activities: (A) register a call for bids, (B) investigate a call for b ids from
the business perspective, (C) investigate a call for bids from the le gal perspec-
tive, and (D) decide on participation in the call for bid. The event seq uences
(Figure 1a) contain the activities performed by one sales oﬃcer thr oughout the
day. The sales oﬃcer works on diﬀerent calls for bids and not necess arily per-
forms all activities for a particular call himself. Applying discovery alg orithms,
like the Inductive Miner [12], yields models allowing for any sequence of e vents
(Figure 1c). Such ”ﬂower-like” models do not give any insight in typica l be-
havioral patterns. When we apply any sequential pattern mining alg orithm
using a threshold of six occurrences, we obtain the seven length-t hree sequential
patterns depicted in Figure 1d (results obtained using the SPMF [14 ] implemen-
tation of the PreﬁxSpan algorithm [13]). However, the data conta ins a frequent
non-sequential pattern where a sales oﬃcer ﬁrst performs A, followed by B and
a C in arbitrary order (Figure 1b). This pattern cannot be found with e xisting
process discovery and sequential pattern mining techniques. The two numbers
2


===== PAGE 3 =====

shown in the transitions (i.e., rectangles) represent (1) the numbe r of events
of this type in the event log that ﬁt this local process model and (2) the total
number of events of this type in the event log. For example, 13 out o f 19 events
of type C in the event log ﬁt transition C, which are indicated in bold in the
log in Figure 1a. Underlined sequences indicate non-continuous insta nces, i.e.
instances with non-ﬁtting events in-between the events forming t he instance of
the local process model.
In this paper we describe a method to extract frequently occurrin g local pro-
cess models, allowing for choice, concurrency, loops, and sequence relations. We
leverage process trees [15] to search for local process models, a nd describe a way
to recursively explore candidate process trees up to a certain mod el size. For
convenience, we often use the Petri net representations for pr ocess trees. In fact,
results can also be visualized as BPMN [7], EPC [16], UML activity diagram
[17], or UML statechart diagram [17]. We deﬁne ﬁve quality dimensions t hat
express the degree of representativeness of a local process mo del with regard
to an event log: support, conﬁdence, language ﬁt , coverage, and determinism.
Based on quality metrics, we describe monotonicity properties over some quality
dimensions and show how they can be used to make the recursive sea rch over
process trees more eﬃcient.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the basic con cepts
used in this paper. Section 3 describes related work in the ﬁelds of pr ocess
discovery and sequential pattern mining. Section 4 describes our lo cal process
model mining approach. Section 5 introduces quality dimensions and m etrics
for local process models and discusses monotonicity properties. S ection 6 de-
scribes a local process model evaluation approach based on alignme nts. Section
7 shows the relevance of the proposed technique using two real life data sets and
compares the results with the results obtained with several relate d techniques.
Section 8 concludes the paper.
2. Preliminaries
In this section we introduce process modeling notations, including Pe tri nets,
process trees, which are used in later sections of this paper.
X ∗ denotes the set of all sequences over a set X and σ = ⟨a1, a 2, . . . , a n⟩ a
sequence of length n; ⟨⟩ is the empty sequence and σ1 ·σ2 is the concatenation
of sequences σ1, σ 2. σ ↾ Q is the projection of σ on Q, e.g. ⟨a, b, c, a, b, c ⟩ ↾{a,c}=
⟨a, c, a, c ⟩. # a(σ ) denotes the number of occurrences of element a in sequence
σ , e.g. # a(⟨a, b, c, a ⟩) = 2.
Deﬁnition 1 (Applying F unctions to Sequences). A partial function f ∈
X ↛ Y can be lifted to sequences over X using the following recursive deﬁnition:
(1) f (⟨⟩) = ⟨⟩; (2) for any σ ∈ X ∗ and x ∈ X:
f (σ · ⟨x⟩) =
{ f (σ ) if x /∈ dom(f ),
f (σ ) · ⟨f (x)⟩ if x ∈ dom(f ).
3


===== PAGE 4 =====

A
B
C
Figure 2: Example of an accepting Petri net.
We assume the set of all process activities ΣL to be given. An event e is
the occurrence of an activity e ∈ ΣL. We call a sequence of events t ∈ ΣL
∗
a trace. An event log L ∈ NΣL ∗
is a ﬁnite multiset of traces. For example,
the event log L = [ ⟨a, b, c ⟩2, ⟨b, a, c ⟩3] consists of 2 occurrences of trace ⟨a, b, c ⟩
and three occurrences of trace ⟨b, a, c ⟩. We lift the sequence projection to the
multisets of sequences in the standard way. For example, for the lo g L given
above L ↾{a,c}= [ ⟨a, c ⟩5]. We lift the number of occurrences in a sequence to
multisets of sequences in the standard way, for example, # a(L) = 5.
Petri nets are directed bipartite graphs consisting of transitions and places,
connected by arcs. Transitions represent activities, while places r epresent the
enabling conditions of transitions. Labels are assigned to transition s to indicate
the type of activity that they model. A special label τ is used to represent
invisible transitions, which are only used for routing purposes and no t recorded
in the execution log.
Deﬁnition 2 (Labeled Petri net). A labeled Petri net N = ⟨P, T, F, ΣM , ℓ ⟩
is a tuple where P is a ﬁnite set of places, T is a ﬁnite set of transitions such
that P ∩ T = ∅, F ⊆ (P × T ) ∪ (T × P ) is a set of directed arcs, called the ﬂow
relation, ΣM is a ﬁnite set of labels representing activities, with τ / ∈ ΣM being a
label representing invisible events, and ℓ : T → ΣM ∪ { τ} is a labeling function
that assigns a label to each transition.
For a node n ∈ (P ∪ T ) we use •n and n• to denote the set of input and output
nodes of n, deﬁned as •n = {n′|(n′, n ) ∈ F } and n• = {n|(n, n ′) ∈ F } .
A state of a Petri net is deﬁned by its marking M ∈ NP being a multiset of
places. A marking is graphically denoted by putting M (p) tokens on each place
p ∈ P . A pair ( N, M ) is called a marked Petri net. State changes occur through
transition ﬁrings. A transition t is enabled (can ﬁre) in a given marking M if
each input place p ∈ • t contains at least one token. Once a transition ﬁres,
one token is removed from each input place of t and one token is added to each
output place of t, leading to a new marking M ′ deﬁned as M ′ = M − • t + t•.
A ﬁring of a transition t leading from marking M to marking M ′ is denoted as
M
l(t)
− → M ′. M1
l(σ)
− → M2 indicates that M2 can be reached from M1 through a
ﬁring sequence σ ′ ∈ ΣM
∗ .
Often it is useful to consider a Petri net in combination with an initial
marking and a set of possible ﬁnal markings. This allows us to deﬁne th e
language accepted by the Petri net and to check whether some be havior is part
of the behavior of the Petri net (can be replayed on it).
4


===== PAGE 5 =====

Deﬁnition 3 (Accepting Petri net). An accepting Petri net is a triple APN =
(N, M 0, MF ), where N is a labeled Petri net, M0 ∈ Np is its initial marking, and
MF ⊆ Np is its set of possible ﬁnal markings, such that ∀M1,M2∈ MF M1 ⊈ M2.
A sequence σ ∈ T ∗ is called a trace of an accepting Petri net APN if M0
σ
− → Mf
for some ﬁnal marking Mf ∈ MF . The language L(AP N) of APN is the set
of all its traces.
Figure 2 shows an example of an accepting Petri net. Circles repres ent
places and rectangles represent transitions. Invisible transitions (labeled τ) are
depicted as black rectangles. Places that belong to the initial markin g contain
a token and places belonging to a ﬁnal marking contain a bottom right label fi
with i a ﬁnal marking identiﬁer, or are simply marked as in case of a single
ﬁnal marking. The language of this accepting Petri net is {⟨A, B, C ⟩, ⟨A, C, B ⟩}.
A diﬀerent process representation is a process tree [15]. Process trees can
only model sound (deadlock-free and livelock-free) processes. T he recursive
deﬁnition of process trees make them a convenient representatio n to iteratively
expand process models into larger process models.
Deﬁnition 4 (Process tree). Let A ∈ ΣM be a ﬁnite set of activities with
τ / ∈ ΣM . ⨁ = {→ , × , ∧ , ⟳} is the set of process tree operators.
• if a ∈ ΣM ∪ { τ} then Q = a is a process tree.
• if Q1, Q 2 are process trees, and ⊕ ∈ ⨁, then Q = ⊕ (Q1, Q 2) is a process
tree.
A process tree is a tree structure consisting of operator and activity nodes, suc h
that each leaf node is an activity node and each non-leaf node is an op erator
node.
The loop operator ( ⟳) has two child nodes, with the ﬁrst child the ”do”
part and the second child the ”redo” child. Process tree p1 = ⟳ (a, b) accepts
language L(p1) = {⟨a⟩, ⟨a, b, a, ⟩, ⟨a, b, a, b, a ⟩, . . . }.
The sequence operator ( → ) has two children, such that the ﬁrst child is
executed prior to execution of the second child. The language of pr ocess tree
p2 = → (a, b) is L(p2) = {⟨a, b ⟩}.
The exclusive choice operator ( × ) has two children, indicating that either
the ﬁrst or the second child will be executed, but not both. The lang uage of
process tree p3 = × (a, b ) is L(p3) = {⟨a⟩, ⟨b⟩}.
The concurrency operator ( ∧ ) has two children, indicating that the both
children will be executed in parallel. Process tree p4 = ∧ (→ (a, b), → (c, d ))
accepts language L(p4) = {⟨a, b, c, d ⟩, ⟨a, c, b, d ⟩, ⟨a, c, d, b ⟩, ⟨c, a, b, d ⟩, ⟨c, a, d, b ⟩,
⟨c, d, a, b ⟩}.
Let p5 = × (⟳ (a, b ), ∧ (c, d )). Figure 3 shows the graphical representation
of p5. Because the do and redo children of a loop operator can be execut ed
an arbitrary number of times, process trees containing a loop oper ator have a
language of inﬁnite size.
5


===== PAGE 6 =====

×
⟳
a b
∧
c d
A
B
C
D
Figure 3: Graphical representation of process tree ×(⟳ (a, b), ∧(c, d)).
We deﬁne n-restricted language, consisting of all language traces of at most
length n ∈ N, as Ln = {t ∈ L | |t| ≤ n}. The n-restricted language is guaran-
teed to be of ﬁnite size, independent of the operators in the proce ss tree. The
5-restricted language of the process tree p5 is L5(p5) = {⟨a⟩, ⟨a, b, a ⟩, ⟨a, b, a, b, a ⟩,
⟨c, d ⟩, ⟨d, c ⟩}.
3. Related Work
ProM’s Episode Miner [18] is a method that can be considered to be in-
between episode mining and process mining, as it discovers a collection of pat-
terns from an event log where each pattern consists of partial or der constructs.
However, contrary to the technique that we describe in this paper , ProM’s
Episode Miner does not support loop and exclusive choice construct s and is not
easily extensible to include new types of constructs.
Lu et al. propose a method called Post Sequential Patterns Mining (P SPM)
[19] that takes a input a set of sequential patterns and post-pro cesses them into
a single graph consisting of sequential and exclusive choice constru cts, which
they call a Sequential Pattern Graph (SGP) [20]. A later extension b y Lu et al.
adds the capability to mine concurrency relations [21]. An SGP can be d iscov-
ered from an event log by ﬁrst applying any existing sequential patt ern mining
algorithm followed by PSPM on the discovered set of sequential patt erns. The
reliance of PSPM methods on the output of sequential pattern minin g techniques
can also be considered to be a drawback of the approach. When two activities A
and B are in parallel then both the orderings ⟨A, B ⟩ and ⟨B, A ⟩ will be present
in the complete log. However, if one of the two orderings is more freq uent than
the other due to chance, one of the two orderings might not reach the support
set in the sequential pattern mining, making it impossible for PSPM met hods
to discover the concurrency of A and B. A more fundamental distinction be-
tween PSPM and Local Process Model (LPM) discovery is that PSPM merges
all relations into one single pattern while LPM discovery aims at discove ring
a collection of patterns. Merging separate patterns into a single gr aph could
result in one single overgeneralizing graph. For example in the case of log L =
[⟨b, a, c ⟩100, ⟨d, a, e ⟩100], sequential pattern mining techniques will ﬁnd two se-
quential patterns: b, a, c and d, a, e . Merging them into a single graph where a is
6


===== PAGE 7 =====

followed by either c or e and is preceded by either b or d results in the loss the long
term dependency where b already determines the occurrence of a c after the a.
Jung et al. [22] describe a method to mine frequent patterns from a collection
of process models by transforming each business process to a vec tor format
and then applying agglomerative clustering. Diamantini et al. [23, 24] take a
similar approach, but apply graph clustering techniques instead of a traditional
clustering approach. These techniques diﬀer from LPM discovery a s they take
as input a set of process models instead of an event log. However, in many
situations there are no existing process models available and, as sho wn in the
introduction, it is not always possible to mine structured process mo dels from
an event log using process discovery techniques.
In later work, Diamantini et al. [25] describe a method to mine freque nt
patterns in process model notation through a two step approach . First each
trace from the event log is transformed into a so called instance gra ph [26],
which is graph representation of a trace that shows which steps in t he trace
are performed sequentially and which steps are performed in paralle l (i.e. over-
lapping in time). In the second step they apply a graph clustering tec hnique
to obtain frequent subgraphs from this set of instance graphs. H owever, since
instance graphs are limited to sequential and parallel constructs, other process
constructs, such as choices and loops, cannot be discovered with the approach
described in Diamantini et al. [25], while they can be discovered with LPM
discovery.
The techniques developed in the area of trace clustering [27, 28, 2 9, 30] are
related to LPM discovery in the sense that both aim to enable extrac tion of
process insight from event logs where the process is too unstruct ured for ex-
isting process discovery techniques to ﬁnd a structured process model. Trace
clustering techniques aim to solve this by clustering similar traces tog ether to
prevent mixing diﬀerent usage scenarios into one single unstructur ed process
model. Trace clustering techniques work well when the original even t log does
not originate from one single process, but in fact originates from mu ltiple pro-
cesses. However, not in all types of complex and ﬂexible event data there is a
cluster tendency in the data. An example for such non-clusterable event data
can be found in the log shown in Figure 1a, where no clustering over th e traces
would enable the discovery of the frequent pattern shown in Figure 1b. The
traces in the log have large parts of randomness within the traces, while trace
clustering helps for cases where there is a large degree of variety between traces.
Declarative process models, such as Declare [31], deﬁne the allowed behavior
through constraints that must be respected while carrying out th e process. This
contrasts procedural process models, which are dominant in the p rocess discov-
ery ﬁeld and specify all possible orderings of events explicitly. Two ex amples of
process discovery approaches that generate declarative proce ss models are the
DPIL Miner [32] and the Declare Miner [33]. Both approaches specify a set
of rule templates that consists of two activity variables and their relation. An
example of such a template is sequence(a, b ), indicating that some activity a
is followed by b. Concrete rules are extracted from the event log based on this
template-based search. However, since the rule templates are limit ed to relations
7


===== PAGE 8 =====

between two activities, more complex relations between three or mo re activities
cannot be discovered. Imagine that for some event log a declarativ e process dis-
covery method ﬁnds two relations: sequence(a, b ) and sequence(b, c ), indicating
that both the occurrences of activity b after a and the occurrences of activity
c after b meet some support threshold. The binary relations sequence(a, b ) and
sequence(b, c ) combined do not imply a tertiary relation equivalent to process
tree → (a, → (b, c )), since it could be the case that speciﬁcally those occurrences
of b that are preceded by a are rarely followed by c. The LPM discovery ap-
proach discussed in this paper enables discovery of relations betwe en three or
more activities.
Hybrid process discovery [34] aims at discovering a process model t hat con-
sists partially of procedural process model constructs and part ially of declarative
process model constructs. Existing hybrid process discovery ap proaches consist
of a ﬁrst step where activities are separated into a group of struc tured activities
and a group of unstructured activities, based on the number of un ique prede-
cessors and successors of an activity. However, some activities, such as activity
a in the event log of Figure 1a, are part of a frequent pattern, but a lso to occur
as noise at random point in the traces. Such activities would be classiﬁ ed as
noisy activities by existing hybrid process discovery approaches, r esulting in this
activity being modeled with binary declarative constructs.
The Fuzzy Miner [35] is a process discovery technique developed to d eal with
complex and ﬂexible process models. It connects nodes that repre sent activities
with edges indicating follows relations, taking into account the relativ e signif-
icance of follows/precedes relations and allowing the user to ﬁlter ou t edges
using a slider. However, the process models obtained using the Fuzz y Miner
lack formal semantics, e.g. when a node has two or more outgoing ed ges, it
is undeﬁned whether this represents a choice, an exclusive choice, or parallel
execution of the connected nodes.
We have described several techniques that are related in that sen se that
i) they aim to enable mining of process insight from less structured pr ocesses
on which traditional process discovery methods fail, or ii) they aim to extract
a collection of process models that each represent some subproce ss. However,
none of the existing techniques in category (i) is able to deal with eve nt logs
where some frequent patterns are surrounded by random event s, as is the case
in the event log in Figure 1a, and all of the existing methods in categor y (ii)
either require a completely diﬀerent type of input (a collection of gra phs), or
they support only a part of the constructs supported by the LPM discovery
approach.
4. Local Process Model Discovery Approach
A local process model (LPM) aims to describe frequent behavior in a n event
log in local, i.e. smaller, patterns, typically between three and ﬁve act ivity
nodes. A LPM does not aim to describe all behavior in a trace complete ly, but
instead aims to describe traces partially, focusing on frequently oc curring pat-
terns. A LPM LN represents behavior over Σ M and accepts language L(LN ).
8


===== PAGE 9 =====

a b · · · z
Figure 4: Set of elementary process trees over Σ L = {a, b, . . . , z}.
The closure of the accepting language with respect to alphabet Σ L is deﬁned as
L(LN , ΣL) = {σ ∈ ΣL
∗ |σ ↾ΣM ∈ L(LN )}.
Here, we introduce a local process model discovery approach tha t consists of
four main steps:
1) Generation Generate the initial set CM 1 (so i = 1) of candidate LPM in
the form of process trees consisting of one leaf for each activity a ∈ ΣL.
Figure 4 shows this set of elementary process trees for an event lo g over
alphabet Σ L = {a, b, . . . , z }. Create selected set of selected LPMs SM =
∅.
2) Evaluation Evaluate LPMs in current candidate set CM i based on a set of
quality criteria.
3) Selection Based on evaluation results, a set SCM i ⊆ CM i of candidate
LPMs are selected. SM = SM ∪ SCM i. If SCM i = ∅ or i ≥ max
iterations:
stop.
4) Expansion Expand SCM i into a set of larger, expanded, candidate process
models, CM i+1. Goto step 2 using the newly created candidate set CM i+1.
Expansion consists of the replacement of one of the leaf activity no des a
of the process tree by an operator node of one of the operator t ypes, where
one of the child nodes is the replaced activity node a and the other is a new
activity node representing one of the activities b ∈ ΣL. Figure 5 shows the set of
expansion operations to leaf node a, consisting of six possible expansions. Two
types of expansion operations are deﬁned for the sequence ( → ) and the loop
(⟳) operator types, as → (a, b ) ̸≡ → (b, a ) and ⟳ (a, b ) ̸≡ ⟳ (b, a ). However,
only one expansion operation is needed for the ∧ and × operators because of
their symmetry ( ∧ (a, b ) ≡ ∧ (b, a ) and × (a, b ) ≡ × (b, a )). We call ∧ and ×
symmetrical operators.
×
×
a c
b
≡
×
a ×
b c
Expanding the ﬁrst leaf node ( a) of process tree × (a, b )
with the × operator and some activity c ∈ ΣL results in
the leftmost process tree depicted on the right, while ap-
plying the same expansion the second leaf node ( b) of
the same process tree results in a behaviorally equivalent
process tree (as shown on the right). The same holds for
expansion of ∧ (a, b ) with the ∧ operator. Therefore, the number of expansions
can be reduced further by restricting expansion of a leaf node tha t has a sym-
metrical operator as parent with the same symmetrical operator only to the
9


===== PAGE 10 =====

a =⇒
→
a b
→
b a
∧
a b
×
a b
⟳
a b
⟳
b a
Figure 5: The set of process tree expansion operations to lea f node a, where b ∈ ΣL.
rightmost child. This prevents unnecessary computation by gener ating both of
the behaviorally equivalent trees shown on the right.
The number of possible expansion operations for a process tree P grows with
the size of the alphabet of the event log |ΣL| and the number of activity nodes
in P . This is easy to see, as each type of expansion operation can be app lied to
each activity node in P , leading to 6 × | ΣL| expansion operations per activity
node. At every point in the expansion process, the number of activ ity nodes in
the tree is equal to the number of expansion operations performe d plus one, as
each expansion operation adds one activity node to the process tr ee.
The local process model discovery procedure stops when no proc ess tree in
the current set of candidate process models meets the quality crit eria, or, to
guarantee termination, when a maximum number of expansion steps ,
max iterations, is reached.
The approach of iteratively expanding, selecting, and expanding pr ocess
trees described above is not theoretically limited to the set of opera tor nodes
described above, and can easily be extended to other operators, such as an
inclusive choice operator or a long-term dependency operator. Ad ding extra
operators, however, comes with the price of increased computat ional complexity
as it increases the number of ways to expand a process tree.
5. Quality Criteria & Metrics
Assume for now that we have an oracle function λ LN that generates a seg-
mentation of a given trace σ : λ LN (σ ) = γ0ξ1γ1ξ2 . . . ξ kγk, with ξi ∈ L(LN ) and
γi /∈ L(LN ), such that the number of events in {ξ1, . . . , ξ k} is maximized: the
higher the number of events in ξi ∈ L(LN ) segments, the larger the share of
trace σ explained by the LPM. A higher value k indicates more frequent pres-
ence of LPM execution traces in σ . λ k
LN (σ ) denotes the number of ξ ∈ L(LN )
segments in λ LN (σ ). λ ξ
LN (σ ) denotes the multiset of segments ξi ∈ L(LN ).
Here we discuss a number of quality criteria for LPM with regard to an event
log.
Support Relates to the number of fragments in the event log that can be con sid-
ered to be an instance of the LPM under evaluation. The rationale be hind this
quality dimension: an LPM whose execution traces are observed mor e frequently
in the event log represents it better. We transform the count of p attern instances
of LN in L into a [0 , 1)-interval number through the following transformation:
support(LN , L ) =
∑
σ∈L λk
LN (σ)
(∑
σ∈L λk
LN (σ))+1
10


===== PAGE 11 =====

Conﬁdence An event ﬁts an LPM when it is part of a segment ξ ∈ L(LN ).
The conﬁdence of event type e ∈ ΣM in LPM LN given event log L, is the ratio
of events of type a in L that ﬁt LN :
conﬁdence(a, L ) =
∑
σ∈L #a(λξ
LN (σ))
#a(L)
We use the harmonic mean to aggregate conﬁdence values for individ ual activ-
ities to a single metric, as it is more sensitive to a single lower-than-ave rage
value than the geometric mean. We deﬁne the conﬁdence of an LPM LN given
an event log L to be the harmonic mean of the individual conﬁdence scores of
the event types of LN :
conﬁdence(LN , L ) = |ΣM |∑
a∈ΣM
1
conﬁdence(a,L)
Language Fit Language ﬁt expresses the ratio of the behavior allowed by the
LPM that is observed in the event log. LPMs that allow for much more b ehavior
than what is observed are likely to overgeneralize and therefore do not describe
the behavior in the event log well. The language ﬁt of an LPM LN given log L
is:
language ﬁt(LN , L ) = |{φ∈ L(LN )|∃σ∈ L:φ∈ λξ
LN (σ)}|
|L(LN )|
Since |L(LN )| = ∞ in case LN contains a loop, language f it(LN , L ) = 0 for
any LN containing a loop. Restricting the language and the LPM instances to
sequences of a bounded length allows us to approximate language ﬁt for models
with inﬁnite size language. Language ﬁt restricted to bound n ∈ N is deﬁned
as:
language ﬁtn (LN , L ) = |{φ∈ Ln(LN )|∃σ∈ L:φ∈ λξ
LN (σ)}|
|Ln(LN )|
×
a ×
b ×
c d
Determinism Flower-like process trees, like the one shown on
the right, are not desirable as they provide little insight in what
behavior we are likely to observe. Deterministic LPMs have more
predictive value in with regard to future behavior. When the
language of LPM LN contains traces if type σaγ 1 and σbγ 2, the
continuation of the trace after observing preﬁx σ can be either
a or b, leaving some uncertainty. LPMs with a high degree of
certainty are preferable over LPMs with a low degree of certainty.
A metric for the determinism quality dimension is dependent on the pro cess
model and not only on its language. Let R(LN ) be a set of reachable states of
an LPM LN . WL : R(LN ) → N represents a function assigning the number of
times a state is reached while replaying the ﬁtting segments of log L on LN .
D : R(LN ) → N represents a function assigning the number of transitions en-
abled in a certain state in LN . Determinism is deﬁned as:
determinism(LN , L ) =
∑
m∈R(LN ) WL(m)
∑
m∈R(LN ) WL(m)·D(m)
Coverage Let LN be an LPM and L be an event log. Let # ∗ (L) denote the
total number of events of event log L. Coverage is deﬁned as the ratio of the
number of events in the log after projecting the event log on the lab els of LN
11


===== PAGE 12 =====

to the number of all events in the log:
coverage(LN , L ) =
#∗(L↾ΣM )
#∗(L)
5.1. Local Process Model Selection & Ranking
The quality dimensions and metrics deﬁned are used to select and ran k local
process models generated through the recursive process tree e xploration ap-
proach. Often, one is interested in multiple quality criteria at the sam e time. A
high-support local process model that has a low determinism score (e.g., a small
ﬂower pattern) does not generate much process insight, while a de terministic
pattern that has low support does not describe the behavior in the log very well.
So it is possible to set thresholds per dimension. It is also useful to ra nk pat-
terns according to a weighted average over the quality criteria. Th e appropriate
weighting of the quality dimensions depends on the business question s and the
situation at hand.
5.2. Monotonicity Properties & Pruning
Often one is not interested in local process models with a low support , con-
ﬁdence, or determinism. Setting a minimum threshold for these qualit y criteria
allows us to prune away those parts of the search space where we k now that ex-
pansions of a candidate local process model can never meet the cr iteria because
of monotonicity, resulting in a speedup of the proposed recursive p rocess tree
exploration procedure. Pruning based on monotonicity is similar to th e prun-
ing performed in the well-known Apriori algorithm [36], and other algo rithms
inspired by the Apriori algorithm, such as [3].
Any expansion of process tree P where a leaf node a ∈ P is replaced by
subtree → (a, b ), → (b, a ), ∧ (a, b ), or ⟳ (a, b ) for any b ∈ ΣL is guaranteed to be
less frequent, i.e. has lower support, than P . The intuition behind this is that
expansion put additional requirements of the alignments, possibly c ausing some
ﬁtting segments for a trace σ obtained by λ ξ
P (σ ) to not ﬁt the expansion of P .
Therefore, when P does not meet support threshold minsup, its expansions of
any activity node a into → (a, b ), → (b, a ), ∧ (a, b ), and ⟳ (a, b ) can be pruned
from the search space.
Process tree P is guaranteed to be at least as deterministic as its expan-
sion where activity node a ∈ P is replaced by subtree × (a, b ) or ∧ (a, b ) for any
b ∈ ΣL. Therefore, when P does not meet determinism threshold mindet, its
expansions of any activity node a into × (a, b ), and ∧ (a, b ) can be pruned from
the search space.
6. Alignment-Based Evaluation of Local Process Models
We now describe a way to deﬁne function λ LN . We evaluate LPMs using
Petri nets because of the rich set of analysis techniques available f or Petri nets.
Important for the deﬁnition of λ LN is the notion of alignments [37], which aims
to ﬁnd a sequence of model ﬁrings starting at the initial marking and ending in
a ﬁnal marking that is an optimal approximation of the behavior in the event
12


===== PAGE 13 =====

log. Alignments relate model traces and event log traces through a series of
three types of moves: synchronous moves , moves on model , and moves on log .
When an event in the event log trace can be performed in the proces s model,
log and model can move synchronously. However, when a trace of the log does
not ﬁt the model, log and model cannot move synchronously from th e start to
the end of the trace. A move on model corresponds to a ﬁring of a transition
in the model that cannot be mapped to an event in the log. A move on log
corresponds to an event in the log that cannot be mapped to a tran sition ﬁring
in the model. Since both moves on model and moves on log are suboptimal
behavior, they are often assigned certain costs such that the alig nment will only
chose to do moves on model or moves on log when these moves are unavoidable.
Moves on model enable the unwanted behavior that a partial execution of the
LPM can be identiﬁed as an LPM execution trace. To avoid this behavio r, we
use a version of alignments where moves on model on non-silent tran sitions are
prohibited (inﬁnite costs).
Alignments aim to match an event log trace with a single execution of a
process model. However, an event log trace can contain more than one execu-
tion trace of an LPM. We modify the Petri net representation of th e LPM
such that we connect each ﬁnal marking to the initial marking throu gh a
silent transition, allowing the alignment to relate a single trace to multip le
executions of the model. Figure 6a shows an example LPM and Figure 6 b
shows the corresponding Petri net after transformation. We tr ansform LPM
LN (N, M 0, MF ) with N = ( P, T, F, ΣM , ℓ ) into LN BL(NBL, M 0, {M0}) with
NBL = (P, T BL, F BL, ΣM , ℓ BL), such that:
• TBL = T ∪ { tblM |M ∈ MF },
• FBL = F ∪ { (p, t blM )|M ∈ MF ∧ p ∈ M } ∪ { tblM |M ∈ MF ∧ p ∈ M0},
• ℓBL ∈ TBL → ΣM ∪ { τ} with:
ℓBL =
{
ℓ(T ), if t ∈ T,
τ, otherwise.
LN BL contains a set of added silent transitions, {tblM |M ∈ MF }, consisting
of one silent transition for each ﬁnal marking M ∈ MF . Backloop : MF → Tbl
is a bijective mapping from a ﬁnal marking M ∈ MF to a silent transition tblM .
A silent transition tblM has all places in ﬁnal marking M as input and place M0
as output. The number of executions of backloop transitions {tblM |M ∈ MF } in
the alignments of L on LN indicates the number of executions of traces of LN in
L. Note that alignments require the model to be in a marking M ∈ MF at the
end of the alignment. This is impossible to obtain when pattern LN is absent
in log L. Therefore, we set the ﬁnal marking to {M0}, allowing the alignments
to make a complete sequence of moves on log , resulting in zero executions of
the model.
Figure 6c illustrates the concept of alignments through an example, showing
the alignment of the non-ﬁtting trace ⟨A, A, C, B, A, A, C, B, B, C ⟩ on the model
of Figure 6b. The top row of the alignments represents the behavio r of the log,
13


===== PAGE 14 =====

A
t1
B
t2
C
t3
t4
(a)
A
t1
B
t2
C
t3
t4
tbl1
(b)
A A C B ≫ ≫ A A C B ≫ ≫ B C
A ≫ C B τ τ A ≫ C B τ τ ≫ ≫
t1 t3 t2 t4 tbl1 t1 t3 t2 4 tbl1
(c)
Figure 6: (a) An example local process model, LN . (b) Process model LN BL , constructed
from LN by adding a silent connection from ﬁnal to initial marking, a nd the ﬁnal marking
set to the initial marking. (c) Alignment of the trace t1 on LN BL when disallowing model
moves on non-silent transitions.
A C B τ τ A C B τ τ
t1 t3 t2 t4 tbl1 t1 t3 t2 4 tbl1
1 2 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 1
Table 1: Number of transitions enabled at each point in the al ignment
while the middle row and the bottom row represent the behavior of th e model.
≫ indicates no move , with a ≫ in the top row indicating a move on model and
in the middle row indicating a move on log . The model is able to mimic the
ﬁrst event of the trace by executing t1 with label A, but is not able to mimic
the second A in the log, resulting in a move on log . The C and B in the log
can be mimicked (by t3 and t2 respectively). Next event A in the log can only
be mimicked by the model by ﬁrst ﬁring tbl1 , resulting in a move on model ,
represented by the ≫ in the log. Afterwards, A can be mimicked and another
move on log is needed for the second A. C and B can again be mimicked, after
which a move on log is again needed as the log cannot mimic tbl1 . Would we
not have prohibited moves on models on non-silent transition, the alignment
could now have executed a move on model on A, enabling synchronous moves
on both B and C, falsely giving the impression that the LPM would have a third
occurrence in the trace. As we prohibited the model move on A, the only option
is to decide a move on log on B and C, thereby not counting the incomplete
occurrence of the pattern.
LPM LN is evaluated on event log L by projecting L on the set of labels of
LN , L′ = L ↾ΣM . The middle row of the alignment of L′ on LN BL represents
the segmentation λ ξ
LN , where τ moves on a transition tbli ∈ { tblm|M ∈ M F}
indicates the start of a new segment. The alignment in Figure 6c show s that
λ ξ
LN (⟨A, A, C, B, A, A, C, B, B, C ⟩) = [ ⟨A, C, B ⟩2].
14


===== PAGE 15 =====

Figure 7: Process model of the behavior of resource 10939 in t he BPIC’12 log, obtained using
the Inductive Miner infrequent (20%).
6.1. Determinism on Petri nets
We now explain through an example how to calculate determinism for Pe tri
nets. Each transition ﬁring in a Petri net corresponds to a change in the marking
of the net. Table 1 shows the transitions ﬁred in the alignment of Figu re 6c. The
bottom row represents the number of transitions that were enab led in the Petri
net when the transition ﬁred. When t3 ﬁred, the Petri net was in a marking
where both t2 and t3 were enabled. The determinism of the net corresponds to
one divided by the average number of enabled transitions during rep lay. In the
example, determinism(LN , L ) = 10
12 .
7. Case Studies
We now evaluate the proposed local process model mining method on two
real life data sets.
7.1. BPIC ’12 Data Set
The Business Process Intelligence Challenge (BPIC)’12 data set orig inates
from a personal loan or overdraft application process in a global ﬁn ancial insti-
tution. We transformed the event log to obtain traces of all activit ies in a single
day performed by one speciﬁc resource (bank employee). This res ource was se-
lected randomly to be resource id 10939. The event log for this spec iﬁc resource
contains 49 cases (working days), 2763 events, and 14 activities. Discovering the
local process models with the approach described in this paper took 34 seconds
on a machine with a 4-core 2.4 GHz processor using a support thresh old of 0.7.
Figure 7 shows the Petri net discovered for resource 10939 with t he Inductive
Miner infrequent with a noise threshold of 20%. The discovered mode l only con-
tains 13 non-silent transitions, as the activity W
valideren aanvraag is ﬁltered
15


===== PAGE 16 =====

(a)
O SELEC-
TED
124/124
O CREA-
TED
124/124
O SENT
124/124
Support 0.9920
Conﬁdence 1.0000
Language ﬁt 5 1.0000
Determinism 1.0000
Coverage 0.1346
(b)
A ACCE-
PTED
103/104
O SELEC-
TED
103/124
O CREA-
TED
103/124
O SENT
103/124
Support 0.9904
Conﬁdence 0.8655
Language ﬁt 5 1.0000
Determinism 1.0000
Coverage 0.1723
(c)
O SELEC-
TED
104/124
A FINAL-
IZED
104/104
O CREA-
TED
104/124
O SENT
104/124
Support 0.9905
Conﬁdence 0.8739
Language ﬁt 5 1.0000
Determinism 0.8811
Coverage 0.1723
(d)
O CANC-
ELED
29/34
A FINAL-
IZED
95/104
O CREA-
TED
124/124
O SENT
124/124
Support 0.9920
Conﬁdence 0.9374
Language ﬁt 5 1.0000
Determinism 0.7591
Coverage 0.1397
(e)
A ACCE-
PTED
64/104
W Nabel-
len
oﬀertes
48/235
O SELEC-
TED
112/124
Support 0.9912
Conﬁdence 0.3933
Language ﬁt 5 1.0000
Determinism 0.6666
Coverage 0.2753
Figure 8: Five local process models discovered on the BPI’12 log using the technique presented
in this paper. Clearly these models provide more insight tha n Figure 7.
out by the Inductive Miner because of its low frequency. The proce ss model in
Figure 7 is very close to a ”ﬂower model”, which is the model that allows all
behavior over its activities. The Inductive Miner without noise ﬁlterin g returns
exactly the ﬂower model over the 14 activities in the log. The discove red process
is unstructured because of a high degree of variance of the event log, which is
caused by 1) the resource performing work on multiple applications in terleaved,
and 2) the resource only performing only a subset of the process s teps for each
application, and which process steps he performs might diﬀer per ap plication.
For such a high-variance event log, it is likely that no start-to-end p rocess model
exists that accurately describes the behavior in the event log.
Figure 8 shows ﬁve local process models discovered with the approa ch de-
scribed in this paper, which give process insights that cannot be obt ained from
the start-to-end process model in Figure 7. Local process mode l (a) shows that
all occurrences of events of type O SELECTED, O CREATED, and O SENT,
occur in this exact order. Figure 7 overgeneralizes by suggesting t hat for ex-
ample O SELECTED can be followed by three skip (black) transitions, after
which another O SELECTED or a A ACCEPTED can be performed, which
never happens in reality. O SELECTED and O CREATED in 7 can be sepa-
16


===== PAGE 17 =====

rated by A FINALIZED, which makes the dependency between O SELECTED
and O CREATED a long-term dependency, of which discovery is still one of
the open problems in process mining [38] The local process model disc overy
method does ﬁnd this long term dependency, because each local pr ocess model
candidate is evaluated on a version of the event log that is projecte d on the set
of labels of candidate under evaluation.
LPM (b) is an extension of LPM (a) as the last three activities in the se-
quence are the same, therefore, each occurrence of LPM (b) in the log will also be
an occurrence of (a). LPM (b) starts with an additional activity A ACCEPTED
of which 103 out of 104 events follow this sequential pattern. The c onﬁdence of
LPM (b) is lower than the conﬁdence of (a), because only 103 out of 124 events
of the last three activities of the sequence in LPM (b) can be explained by the
model while each event of these activities is explained by LPM (a). From this
we can conclude that there are 21 occurrences of the sequence O SELECTED,
O CREATED, O SENT that are not preceded by A ACCEPTED. Partly this
can be explained by A ACCEPTED only occurring 104 times, however, the
model also shows that there is one A ACCEPTED event that is not followed
by O SELECTED, O CREATED, and O SENT. It might be the case that this
A ACCEPTED event does not ﬁt the regular workﬂow, or alternatively it might
be the case that the other process steps of after A ACCEPTED were executed
by a diﬀerent resource. Note that the determinism of LPMs (a) and (b) is 1.0,
since both LPMs are sequential. Language ﬁt of both LPMs is also 1.0, since
both allow for only one execution path, which is observed in the log.
Local process model (c) shows that all instances of A FINALIZED are in
parallel with O SELECTED, and ultimately followed by O CREATED and
O SENT. This is more informative than Figure 7, which allows for much more
behavior over activities A FINALIZED, O SELECTED, O CREATED, and
O SENT.
Local process model (d) shows that each O CREATED and O SENT is pre-
ceded by either O CANCELED (29 times) or A FINALIZED (95 times). Also
most of the O CANCELED events (29 out of 34) and most of the A FINALIZED
events (95 out of 104) are followed by O CREATED and O SENT. Figure 7 does
not provide the insight that O CANCELED is followed by O CREATED and
O SENT. Note that the determinism of LPM (d) is lower than the determinism
of LPM (c). This is in agreement with the intuition of determinism, as the
concurrency at the start of LPM (c) can be regarded as a choice between two
activities followed by a deterministic step of executing the other act ivity, while
LPM (d) starts with a choice between two activities. After the concurrenc y in
LPM (c) and the choice in LPM (d) respectively, the two models proceed iden-
tically. Local process model (d) has higher conﬁdence than LPMs (b) and (c) as
only ﬁve of the O CANCELED and nine of the A FINALIZED events cannot
be explained by the model. LPM (d) has a higher conﬁdence than LPM (c),
mostly because all occurrences of O CREATED and O SENT could be aligned
in LPM (d) while only 104 out of 124 could be aligned in LPM (c).
Notice that the number of events that were aligned on A FINALIZED is
lower in LPM (d) than in LPM (c). This indicates that there are six occur-
17


===== PAGE 18 =====

rences where the alignments aligned on O CANCELED while it was possible
as well to align on A FINALIZED (as both occurred). Therefore, an inclusive
choice construct would have been a more correct representation than the exclu-
sive choice that is currently included in the LPM. Note that our proce ss tree
based discovery approach allows for easy extension with additional operators,
like e.g. an inclusive choice operator.
LPM (e) shows an example of a weaker local process model that performs
lower on some quality metrics but can still be discovered with the desc ribed
approach. The coverage of LPM (e) is much higher than the other models
as W Nabellen oﬀertes (Dutch for “Calling after call for bids”) is a frequently
occurring event in the log. The conﬁdence of LPM (e) is however much lower
it explains only a fraction of the W Nabellen oﬀertes events.
7.2. Comparison with Related Techniques
In this section we apply some of the related techniques described in S ection
3 to the event log of BPI’12 resource 10939 and compare the insight s that can
be obtained with those methods with the insights that we obtained wit h LPM
discovery.
We start with the Declare miner [33], which mines a set of binary const raints
from the data based on a set of constraint templates. Figure 9b sh ows the re-
sult of the Declare miner [33] on the BPI’12 resource 10939 event log with a
support threshold of 90%, requiring that the constraints hold in 90 % of the
cases. The model shows that a choice constraint holds between O SELECTED
and W Nabellen oﬀertes , indicating that on each working day either at least
one event of type O SELECTED or W Nabellen oﬀertes occurs. The same can
be said about the pairs of event W Nabellen oﬀertes and O SENT, W Nabellen
oﬀertes and O CREATED, and W Nabellen oﬀertes and O Completeren aan-
vraag. Furthermore a not chain succession constraint is discovered between
W Nabellen oﬀertes and O SENT, indicating that W Nabellen oﬀertes and
O SENT never directly follow each other. Not chain succession constraints are
also discovered between W Nabellen oﬀertes and O SELECTED, and between
W Nabellen oﬀertes and O CREATED. Note that the none of the insights that
we obtained from the LPMs in Figure 8 could be obtained from this Decla re
model.
By lowering the support threshold parameter of the Declare miner t o 80%,
we obtain a larger set of constraints. An exclusive choice constraint is found
between W Valideren aanvraag and W Nabellen oﬀertes , indicating that 80% of
the cases contain one of the two activities but not both. The same t ype of con-
straint is found between W Valideren aanvraag and W Completeren aanvraag.
The rest of the constraints found are not chain succession constraints.
To ﬁnd constraints that can be deduced from the LPMs of Figure 8, such as
the sequential ordering between O SELECTED and O CREATED from LPM
(a), the support threshold would need to be lowered even further, lea ding to
an overload of constraints being found by the Declare miner. Declar e miner
evaluates the constraints based on the ratio of cases in which the c onstraint
holds. However, when activities are often repeated within cases, this is not
18


===== PAGE 19 =====

(a)
 (b)
Figure 9: (a) The result of the Declare miner [33] with a support threshold of 80% on the
BPI’12 resource 10939 event log. (b) The result of the same method on the same log with
support threshold 90%.
Figure 10: Result of the Fuzzy miner [35] with default parame ters on the BPI’12 resource
10939 event log.
19


===== PAGE 20 =====

(a)
 (b)
(c)
 (d)
Figure 11: The ﬁrst four episodes discovered by ProM’s Episo de Miner [18] on the BPI’12
resource 10939 event log.
a useful evaluation criterion. Employee 10939 performs most of th e activities
multiple times during a working day, therefore, to assess whether a n activity
a is generally followed by an activity b it is more useful to count the ratio of
occurrences of activity a that are followed by b as in LPM discovery, instead of
the number of cases that contain an a event that is followed by a b event.
Even more important is the fact that Declare miner is limited to binary
constraints while LPM discovery mines n-ary relations. That is likely to be the
cause of Declare mining not ﬁnding any of the LPM relations found in Fig ure
8. At the same time this diﬀerence provides an explanation why Declar e mining
ﬁnds so many uninteresting not chain succession constraints between activities:
when there are multiple a events in a trace, you are likely to ﬁnd at least one a
that is in a not chain succession relation with some activity b, leading to a high
ratio of traces that fulﬁll such a not chain succession constraint.
Figure 10 shows the result of the Fuzzy miner on the BPI’12 resourc e 10939
event log with default parameters. The discovered Fuzzy model do es contain
a path from O
SELECTED through O CREATED to O SENT, which were
shown to be in a sequential relation by LPM (a). However, the Fuzzy model al-
lows for many more paths, therefore the sequential relation betw een those three
activities cannot be inferred from the Fuzzy model. LPM (c) showed a sequen-
tial path between O CREATED and O SENT that is preceded by an arbitrary
ordering of activities O SELECTED and A FINALIZED. The Fuzzy model also
shows arrows from both O SELECTED and A FINALIZED to O CREATED,
however, as a Fuzzy model does not make a distinction between par allelism,
inclusive choice constructs and exclusive choice constructs, it doe s not answer
the question whether O SELECTED is preceded by both O SELECTED and
A FINALIZED, or just by one of the two.
Figure 11 shows the ﬁrst four episodes found with ProM’s Episode Min er
on the BPI’12 resource 10939 event log. The ﬁrst two episodes sho w the same
sequential ordering from O SELECTED, O CREATED, and O SENT that is
represented by LPM (a). The ﬁrst episode suggests that the O CREATED
event is optional, and can be skipped. LPM (a) however shows that all of
the O SELECTED events are followed by an O CREATED event, therefore it
is never skipped. Episode (c) indicates that O SELECTED and O CREATED
can happen in any order, but both of them have to occur before O SENT occurs
20


===== PAGE 21 =====

and episode (d) indicates that O SELECTED has to happen before O SENT
and O CREATED can occur. Episodes (a), (c) and (d) can be considered to
be less speciﬁc versions of episode (b). ProM’s Episode Miner is not able to
discover patterns with choice constructs like LPM (d), or patterns with loops.
7.3. Gazelle Data Set
10307
578/2797
10315
446/3449
33449
132/3658
33469
132/3612
Figure 12: A non-sequential local process model discovered on the Gazelle data set.
The Gazelle data set is a real life data set used in the KDD-CUP’2000 and
contains customers’ web click-stream data provided by the Blue Ma rtini Soft-
ware company. The Gazelle data set has been frequently used for e valuating
sequential pattern mining algorithms. For each customer there is a series of
page views, in which each page view is treated as an event. The data s et con-
tains 29369 sequences (customers), 87546 events (page views) , and 1423 distinct
event types (web pages). The average sequence length is three e vents. More
detailed information on the Gazelle data set can be found in [39]. We com pare
the local process models found on this data set with the sequential patterns ob-
tained with the well-known sequential pattern mining algorithm Preﬁx Span [13]
as implemented in the SPMF [14] sequential pattern mining library. We s et the
minimal support parameter of the sequential pattern mining algorit hms to 10%
of the number of input sequences. All obtained sequential patter ns were also dis-
covered by the local process model miner. Additionally, several no n-sequential
patterns were discovered that cannot be discovered with sequen tial pattern min-
ing techniques, an example of which is shown in Figure 12. This shows th at this
well-known sequential pattern mining evaluation data set contains f requent and
high-conﬁdence patterns that cannot be found with sequential p attern mining
approaches, but can be found with the local process model discov ery approach.
This indicates the applicability of local process model discovery to th e ﬁeld of
pattern mining.
8. Conclusion & F uture Work
This paper presents a method to discover local process models tha t can ex-
press the same rich set of relations between activities as business p rocess models,
but describe frequent fragments instead of complete start-to- end processes. We
presented ﬁve quality criteria and corresponding metrics quantify ing the degree
of representativeness of a local process model for an event log. We describe
monotonicity properties of quality metrics that can be used to prun e the search
space and speed up computation. We illustrate through two case st udies on
21


===== PAGE 22 =====

real-life data sets that the proposed method enables the user to o btain process
insight in the form of valuable patterns when the degree of randomn ess/variance
of the event data prevents traditional process discovery techn iques to discover
a structured start-to-end process model. Furthermore, the p roposed local pro-
cess model discovery approach is able to discover long-term depen dencies, which
most process discovery approaches have diﬃculties with, as a resu lt of evaluating
the local process models on a projected version of the event log.
The computational time involved in discovering local process models r apidly
grows with the number of activities in the event log. Therefore, we c onsider au-
tomatic discovery of projections on the event log (limiting search to a promising
subset of the activities) to be an important area of future work, a s it would
enable the discovery of local process models on logs with larger numb ers of ac-
tivities. An alternative approach to deal with larger numbers of act ivities that
is to be explored is the use of meta-heuristic search methods, e.g. s imulated
annealing, which allows partial exploration of the search space.
Finally, we consider it to be a relevant future direction of research t o enhance
local process models with guards, time information, and resource in formation.
References
[1] W. M. P. van der Aalst, Process Mining: Data Science in Action, Spr inger,
2016.
[2] H. Mannila, H. Toivonen, A. I. Verkamo, Discovery of frequent e pisodes
in event sequences, Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 1 (3) (199 7)
259–289.
[3] R. Agrawal, R. Srikant, Mining sequential patterns, in: Proceed ings of the
11th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE), IEE E, 1995,
pp. 3–14.
[4] G. Casas-Garriga, Discovering unbounded episodes in sequentia l data, in:
Proceedings of the 7th European Conference on Principles and Pra ctice of
Knowledge Discovery in Databases (PKDD), Vol. 7, Springer Science &
Business Media, 2003, p. 83.
[5] M. Atallah, W. Szpankowski, R. Gwadera, Detection of signiﬁcant sets of
episodes in event sequences, in: Proceedings of the 4th IEEE Inte rnational
Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), IEEE, 2004, pp. 3–10.
[6] W. Reisig, Petri nets: an introduction, Vol. 4, Springer Science & Business
Media, 2012.
[7] Object Management Group, Notation (BPMN) version 2.0, OMG Sp eciﬁ-
cation.
[8] J. C. A. M. Buijs, Flexible evolutionary algorithms for mining struct ured
process models, Ph.D. thesis, PhD thesis. Eindhoven, The Netherla nds:
Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, 2014 (2014).
22


===== PAGE 23 =====

[9] L. R. Rabiner, A tutorial on hidden markov models and selected ap plica-
tions in speech recognition, Proceedings of the IEEE 77 (2) (1989) 257–286.
[10] C. Goller, A. Kuchler, Learning task-dependent distributed re presentations
by backpropagation through structure, in: Neural Networks, 1 996., IEEE
International Conference on, Vol. 1, IEEE, 1996, pp. 347–352.
[11] S. Hochreiter, J. Schmidhuber, Long short-term memory, Ne ural computa-
tion 9 (8) (1997) 1735–1780.
[12] S. J. J. Leemans, D. Fahland, W. M. P. van der Aalst, Discoverin g block-
structured process models from event logs - a constructive appr oach, in:
Application and Theory of Petri Nets and Concurrency, Springer, 2013,
pp. 311–329.
[13] J. Pei, J. Han, B. Mortazavi-Asl, H. Pinto, Q. Chen, U. Dayal, M.- C.
Hsu, PreﬁxSpan: mining sequential patterns eﬃciently by preﬁx-p rojected
pattern growth, in: Proceedings of the 17th International Conf erence on
Data Engineering (ICDE), IEEE, 2001, pp. 215–224.
[14] P. Fournier-Viger, A. Gomariz, T. Gueniche, A. Soltani, C.-W. Wu , V. S.
Tseng, SPMF: a java open-source pattern mining library, The Jour nal of
Machine Learning Research 15 (1) (2014) 3389–3393.
[15] J. C. A. M. Buijs, B. F. van Dongen, W. M. P. van der Aalst, A gen etic
algorithm for discovering process trees, in: Proceedings of the 20 12 IEEE
Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC), IEEE, 2012, pp. 1– 8.
[16] G. Keller, A.-W. Scheer, M. N¨ uttgens, Semantische Prozeßmo dellierung
auf der Grundlage” Ereignisgesteuerter Prozeßketten (EPK)”, Institut f¨ ur
Wirtschaftsinformatik, 1992.
[17] International Organization for Standardization, ISO/IEC 19 505-1:2012 -
Information technology - Object Management Group Uniﬁed Modelin g
Language (OMG UML) - Part 1: Infrastructure.
[18] M. Leemans, W. M. P. van der Aalst, Discovery of frequent epis odes in event
logs, in: Data-Driven Process Discovery and Analysis, Springer, 20 14, pp.
1–31.
[19] J. Lu, W. Chen, O. Adjei, M. Keech, Sequential patterns post processing
for structural relation patterns mining, Strategic Advancement s in Utilizing
Data Mining and Warehousing Technologies: New Concepts and Develo p-
ments (2009) 216.
[20] J. Lu, X.-F. Wang, O. Adjei, F. Hussain, Sequential patterns g raph and
its construction algorithm, Chinese Journal of Computers 27 (6) ( 2004)
782–788.
23


===== PAGE 24 =====

[21] J. Lu, W. Chen, M. Keech, Graph-based modelling of concurren t sequen-
tial patterns, Exploring Advances in Interdisciplinary Data Mining an d
Analytics: New Trends (2011) 110.
[22] J.-Y. Jung, J. Bae, L. Liu, Hierarchical business process clust ering, in: Pro-
ceedings of the 2008 IEEE International Conference on Services Computing
(SCC), Vol. 2, IEEE, 2008, pp. 613–616.
[23] C. Diamantini, D. Potena, E. Storti, Mining usage patterns from a repos-
itory of scientiﬁc workﬂows, in: Proceedings of the 27th Annual AC M
Symposium on Applied Computing (SAC), ACM, 2012, pp. 152–157.
[24] C. Diamantini, L. Genga, D. Potena, E. Storti, Pattern discove ry from
innovation processes, in: Proceedings of the 2013 International Conference
on Collaboration Technologies and Systems (CTS), IEEE, 2013, pp. 457–
464.
[25] C. Diamantini, L. Genga, D. Potena, Behavioral process mining f or unstruc-
tured processes, Journal of Intelligent Information Systems (2 016) 1–28.
[26] B. F. Van Dongen, W. M. P. Van der Aalst, Multi-phase process m in-
ing: Building instance graphs, in: International Conference on Con ceptual
Modeling, Springer, 2004, pp. 362–376.
[27] M. Song, C. W. G¨ unther, W. M. P. Van der Aalst, Trace cluster ing in
process mining, in: Business Process Management Workshops, Spr inger,
2008, pp. 109–120.
[28] R. P. Jagadeesh Chandra Bose, W. M. P. van der Aalst, Contex t aware trace
clustering: Towards improving process mining results, in: Proceedin gs of
the 2009 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining, SIAM, 20 09, pp.
401–412.
[29] F. Folino, G. Greco, A. Guzzo, L. Pontieri, Mining usage scenario s in busi-
ness processes: Outlier-aware discovery and run-time prediction , Data &
Knowledge Engineering 70 (12) (2011) 1005–1029.
[30] B. F. A. Hompes, J. C. A. M. Buijs, W. M. P. van der Aalst, P. M. D ixit,
J. Buurman, Discovering deviating cases and process variants usin g trace
clustering, in: Proceedings of the 27th Benelux Conference on Art iﬁcial
Intelligence (BNAIC), November, pp. 5–6.
[31] M. Pesic, H. Schonenberg, W. M. P. Van der Aalst, Declare: Full support
for loosely-structured processes, in: Enterprise Distributed Ob ject Com-
puting Conference, 2007. EDOC 2007. 11th IEEE International, I EEE,
2007, pp. 287–287.
[32] S. Sch¨ onig, C. Cabanillas, S. Jablonski, J. Mendling, Mining the or gani-
sational perspective in agile business processes, in: Enterprise, B usiness-
Process and Information Systems Modeling, Springer, 2015, pp. 3 7–52.
24


===== PAGE 25 =====

[33] F. M. Maggi, A. J. Mooij, W. M. P. Van der Aalst, User-guided disc overy
of declarative process models, in: Computational Intelligence and D ata
Mining (CIDM), 2011 IEEE Symposium on, IEEE, 2011, pp. 192–199.
[34] F. M. Maggi, T. Slaats, H. A. Reijers, The automated discovery of hybrid
processes, in: Business Process Management, Springer, 2014, p p. 392–399.
[35] C. W. G¨ unther, W. M. P. Van Der Aalst, Fuzzy mining–adaptive p ro-
cess simpliﬁcation based on multi-perspective metrics, in: Business P rocess
Management, Springer, 2007, pp. 328–343.
[36] R. Agrawal, R. Srikant, et al., Fast algorithms for mining associat ion rules,
in: Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Very La rge Data
Bases (VLDB), Vol. 1215, Morgan Kaufmann, 1994, pp. 487–499.
[37] W. M. P. van der Aalst, A. Adriansyah, B. F. van Dongen, Replay ing his-
tory on process models for conformance checking and performan ce analysis,
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery
2 (2) (2012) 182–192.
[38] W. M. P. Van der Aalst, A. J. M. M. Weijters, Process mining: a re search
agenda, Computers in industry 53 (3) (2004) 231–244.
[39] R. Kohavi, C. E. Brodley, B. Frasca, L. Mason, Z. Zheng, KDD- cup 2000 or-
ganizers’ report: Peeling the onion, ACM SIGKDD Explorations News let-
ter 2 (2) (2000) 86–93.
25